>> JAY WEIDNER: Hi.
I'm Jay Weidner, guest host
for "The Healing Matrix"
here on Gaiam TV.
Today our guest is Robert Moss.
Robert is the creator of Active
Dreaming, an original synthesis
of modern dreamwork
and shamanism.
His newest book is "Dreaming
the Soul Back Home."
Hey, Robert.
>> ROBERT MOSS: Good to
be dreaming with you, Jay.
>> JAY: Yeah, it's good to
be sitting here talking about
things that are interesting.
This is a show on
healing, "Healing Matrix."
>> MOSS: I've heard of it.
>> JAY: Yeah.
And so I would like to
talk about the healing
nature of dreamwork
and shamanism
and concentrate on that
maybe, as opposed to some
of the other stuff
that you talk about.
I've made a long
study of shamanism
since I was a young man,
read Mircea Eliade and all
the other guys.
And it came to me
maybe in my late 30s
that maybe a shaman is actually
a highly psychic person.
And that they're-- when a
person comes that's maybe going
to die, they know it, and so
they don't necessarily treat
that person as, you know, they
treat the ones that they know
they can heal.
>> MOSS: Well, you've opened
up a lot of things at once.
First of all, death
can be the healer.
>> JAY: Yeah.
>> MOSS: And the shaman's
interest as a healer is not
necessarily whether you're
going to die or not but where
your soul is going, because your
soul is going to another world,
which the shaman knows
through direct experience.
And your healing
journey might be
one that takes you beyond
the gates of death.
One of the universal
characteristics
of the shamans
that interest me is
that they've died and come
back, quite literally.
>> JAY: Yes.
>> MOSS: Another universal
characteristic not understood
or talked about enough in
the neoshamanic movement
in the United States is
that shamans are dreamers.
In the language of
Native Americans,
the dominant word for
shaman in North American
means one who dreams.
In Mohawk, which I had to
learn because of my dreams,
it's ratetshents.
It means one who
dreams, one who can
travel in dreaming
for others, one
who can heal through
dreams, one who
can see the future in
dreams, all of that.
So these are some of
the characteristics
of the shamanic type.
The province of
the shaman is soul,
and the understanding
of the shamanic dreamer
is that souls can be
lost or disassociated
or go missing in various
ways through what shamans
call soul loss.
You suffer pain.
You suffer trauma.
You suffer abuse.
Part of you can't stand being
in a world that's so cruel,
so you go somewhere else.
The job of the shaman is to
help rescue those soul parts
and put them back in the body.
This can be done as
a shamanic operation.
But you know what, Jay?
I like to help people become
shamans of their own souls
and healers of their own lives.
And if I can get them to
work with their dreams,
including maybe the last dream
they remember from maybe 30
years ago, we have a
portal, a personal gateway
for soul recovery.
That's the heart of it.
>> JAY: So soul loss is also an
epidemic in our society right
now, wouldn't you say?
>> MOSS: I've never met anybody
who hasn't suffered soul loss.
It's not unique
to the modern era.
>> JAY: Right.
>> MOSS: However, what is
probably characteristic
of the modern era more than
previous eras is that so many
of us are lost to
the world of spirit,
lost to a means
of direct access.
People are looking.
There are all these ways and
routes that are being offered.
But as a culture,
as a society, we
have lost the direct connection
with the deeper world, which
most societies have valued.
The aboriginal understanding
in my native Australia
is your personal dreams can take
you into the dreamtime, which
is not the bargain basement
of Western psychology
with its subconscious and so on.
The dreamtime is where it's at.
It's where you meet your
true spiritual teachers.
It's where you
remember the origin
and purpose of human life.
It's where you can gain
the resources for healing
that come from having a mythic
sense of what life is all
about.
Your dreams can take you there.
In our culture,
we've forgotten that.
I'm one of those who's trying
to bring all of that back.
>> JAY: That's incredible.
I'm a big fan of
aboriginal culture
and the dreamtime philosophy.
And it's incredibly fascinating.
They will see their child--
a couple will see their child
together in a dream
before he's born.
>> MOSS: Yes.
>> JAY: And they name him, and
they talk about him as a real
person.
And it's really fascinating.
>> MOSS: Yes.
I did that with my daughters.
>> JAY: You did?
>> MOSS: When my youngest
daughter was ready to come--
my wife was five
months pregnant--
she dreamed that my daughter
appeared as a beautiful--
our daughter appeared as a
beautiful golden child aged
about two and said her name
and said, "This is my name.
Get it right."
So we knew her gender.
We knew her name.
We were absolutely poised to
welcome her into the world.
All of us can do this.
You don't have to belong to
a tribal culture to do it.
We just need to come
awake to what dreaming is
and how spirit communicates
through dreams.
Can I tell you a story about a
watershed in my understanding
of these things involving
an indigenous people?
>> JAY: Yeah.
>> MOSS: So 25 years ago,
I decide I'd go and live
on the land in this country,
where I was now living.
I bought some land
in upstate New York
on the edge of traditional
Mohawk Indian territory.
I bought it because of a hawk,
a red-tailed hawk that gave me
a sign, and a white oak
tree behind the house.
And I started dreaming
very powerfully,
the way I'd done as a boy.
And in one of my
dreams, I'm flying
on the wings of a
red-tailed hawk.
I'm lucid.
I'm enjoying catching a thermal.
I don't mind the
slight discomfort
when the dried-up
needles of a spruce tree
brush my wing feathers.
And I feel a pull of
someone's intention.
I don't have to go,
but I choose to go.
I'm now in a cabin in the
woods in a primal setting
near Montreal maybe.
There's this beautiful
ancient Indian woman,
Native American
woman, who's speaking
to me in cadenced language,
like lake water lapping.
And it's lovely, but
I don't understand it.
It's not one of
those New Age dreams
where you know
everything all at once.
This will require work.
And there are other signs, and
I start writing this stuff down,
and I know it's important.
And then I find members of the
longhouse people, the Iroquois,
the Onkwehonwe, the real people.
And they say as
they listen to me,
repeating what I've
heard in my dreams,
oh, Robert, you're
speaking Mohawk,
but you're hard to
understand, not just because
of your Anglo-Australian accent
but because you speak as Mohawk
might have been
spoken 300 years ago,
and there's some Huron in it.
I discover later that the
woman who had called me
was born Huron and
adopted by the Mohawks
and became mother of the Wolf
clan of the Mohawk Nation.
She taught me this
about dreaming.
This is fundamental.
This is watershed.
One of these funny
words became the key.
The funny word sounds like
this, ondinnonk, ondinnonk.
What does it mean?
It means the secret wish of
the soul especially as revealed
in dreams.
With that word goes
a whole practice,
a model of understanding
for dreaming and healing.
The model is this.
Dreams show us what the
soul wants as opposed
to what the ego wants.
If we follow what
the soul wants,
we attract bright
energy, and we do better.
If we don't, we gradually
join the procession
of the walking dead.
Dreams can also
show us where soul
has gone through soul loss.
And if you don't have dreams,
that is the number one symptom
that you are soul gone, because
the dreamer in you is missing,
and you need help
to get it back.
I learned that
from the woman I've
called in my books Island Woman.
She has historical identity.
I discovered that later.
I'm a former history professor,
and I can do research.
So that was a
watershed, understanding
from a native tradition speaking
to me directly that dreaming
is about soul and
very specifically
about identifying
what the soul wants
and honoring that and
that decent people
and decent culture gather
around the dreamer.
Every morning there's
a dream, and they
listen for what the
soul wants, and they
help that person to move
in the direction of soul.
That's the heart of it.
>> JAY: So how does one
interpret their dreams to know?
Can they self-diagnosis
themselves as their soul
through their dreams?
>> MOSS: The best way to
understand a dream is to gather
more information from the
dream, to travel back inside it,
not to sit around
discussing it as a text.
>> JAY: Right.
>> MOSS: If you're
with a native people,
they won't sit around
analyzing dreams.
They will assume to begin
with that in your dreams
you went somewhere or you
received a visitation.
So this is bypassing the
psychological approach.
Who were you with last night?
OK.
You're in this cabin and
such and such happened.
Who was that?
Where were you?
Was it in this world
or in the real world?
That's the old Iroquoian
term for the dream world.
The dream world
is the real world.
>> JAY: Right.
>> MOSS: This is the shadow
world, the surface world.
So you don't sit around
discussing it as a text.
If it's got some energy,
you start acting it out.
You do some theater.
You do some performance.
You bring it alive.
The tiger is in the room.
The snake is on the floor.
The bird is in the air.
In my workshops, it's like that.
We start with theater, with
performance, with movement,
because you want the energy
from the dream, not just
the information.
>> JAY: Right.
>> MOSS: Then when it comes to
knowing what's going on inside
the dream, of course
you develop a practice.
And you develop a practice
of talking about these things
to people and
helping to give them
feedback in a non-authoritarian,
non-controlling way.
I will never say to you, your
dream means such and such.
I will say to you, Jay,
if it were my dream
or if it were my life,
this is what I would think.
I would make you the
author of meaning
for your own dreams
and your own life.
I will not take
that away from you,
and I won't tolerate
anyone else doing that.
I won't tolerate anyone
else interpreting or telling
people what their dreams
or their lives mean.
But you want to get to the
fundamental meaning of a dream?
Trust your feelings.
Run a reality check.
Could any of this happen in
the waking world in the future?
Because we go to the
future all the time.
Learn to do dream
reentry, which means
traveling back inside a dream--
>> JAY: I was going
to ask you about that
>> MOSS: --to get
more information.
>> JAY: Fascinating.
>> MOSS: This is a core
technique of active dreaming.
And by the way,
for shamanic types,
the best portal for a
journey you will find
is an authentic
spontaneous image
that has come to you
or to someone else
rather than some
prefabricated structure
of journey exercises read
off a yellow legal pad,
as I've seen some neoshamans do.
>> JAY: So have an image
that is special to you?
What do you mean by that?
>> MOSS: Well, we had a
wonderful 12-year-old boy
at a recent workshop of mine.
He dreamed that he was
out fishing in a boat,
and a shark tugged on
the line and pulled him
down to an underwater
civilization
where they had methods of
healing beyond our society.
Great.
So 35 of us all journeyed
with him inside his dream.
He went back inside his dream.
He received guidance
for the family.
He had a wonderful adventure.
We all went with him.
We got insights into healing,
from cellular healing
to spiritual healing.
We had a wonderful
adventure in a civilization
under the sea journeying
with his spontaneous dream
where he's pulled by the
shark down to this realm
beneath the waters.
Let me give you an example
in relation to soul recovery.
Lots of people say to me,
I don't remember my dreams.
Our culture is
full of people who
are suffering a
protracted dream drought.
I know lots and lots of people.
>> JAY: Yeah.
>> MOSS: Plenty of people have
got this organized spiritual
practice.
But you know what?
They're missing
out on the movies.
out on the theater.
They're missing out on
the fun, the spontaneity.
They're in this
program, but they
don't have their own stuff.
>> JAY: Right.
>> MOSS: So a woman in this
condition in France said to me
on the second day of a three-day
residential retreat devoted
to "Dreaming the Soul Back
Home," she said, Robert,
I'm getting fed up, because all
these people are talking about
their dreams at the
breakfast table,
and I still don't have any.
I do shamanic practice, I
do yoga, I do meditation,
but I don't remember any
dreams from the night.
I say, I don't believe you.
She looks at me.
Tell me the last
dream you remember.
Oh, it's from 30 years ago.
She's 37.
OK.
Tell me the last
dream you remember.
She says, OK, well, a hand
reaches from behind a curtain
offering me chocolate,
and I like chocolate,
but I'm scared because
I can't see the face.
So I scream for my parents.
And they just say,
it's just a dream.
Go back to sleep.
And I've got no help,
and I'm terrified.
Good Catholic girl, she says,
so I prayed to Jesus and Mary
and all the saints
no more dreams.
And her prayer was answered,
no dreams for 30 years.
So I say, OK, how about
going back into that dream
from 30 years ago and find
out what's behind the curtain,
and find out what you can
accomplish for your own healing
by doing that?
She's scared, but
she's ready to do it
if I come with her and
three other people come
with her as what
we call trackers.
We're going to journey together
through the doorway of a dream
and see what we can do.
So I'm drumming.
We use drumming in my
workshops, shamanic drumming.
She goes right there.
She opens the curtain.
She sees an angelic being, a
being of radiance and light,
and she's thrilled.
And then the features resolve
into the face of her father's
best friend, a man who was
like a second father to him.
She loved him.
He had a toy shop.
He let her play in the
toy shop after hours.
And she says, it was you.
Why didn't you show yourself?
He says, cheri,
you've forgotten.
I was killed in
that road accident
three days before your dream.
My face was mutilated.
I didn't know how to
change my appearance,
so I had to hide myself.
But I wanted you to
have something sweet.
This moment of
revelation opened her up.
It's a residential workshop.
The following morning
at the breakfast table,
she is the first there.
She cannot wait for us to come.
She says, all night
long my dreams
are running through my mind
like a high-speed train, a Train
Grand Vitesse,
vroom, vroom, vroom.
She tells us eight fully formed
narrative dreams in succession
at the breakfast table.
That is soul recovery, Jay.
Getting the dreams back, getting
the dreamer back, getting
the seven-year-old back was
the heart of soul recovery.
And she did it for herself
with us helping and supporting.
That's what I love to do.
>> JAY: That's a
pretty amazing story.
So you had an experience
when you were really young
in Australia, what we would
call an NDE today, I guess.
>> MOSS: I don't
like the phrase much.
It's useful as a
shorthand so you
don't have to get in long,
complicated discussions.
But when I died for
the first time--
I died three times as
a boy-- at age three,
the doctors in Hogarth,
Tasmania in a bitter winter
said to my parents,
oh, poor kid.
He died and he came
back, didn't he?
So that's the way I think
of it, died and came back.
I don't remember much from that
experience at three years old,
except it was very
hard after that for me
to stay in the
body in this world.
I was terribly sick
for eight years,
as if I didn't want to
be in the world, kept
trying to check out.
I remember vividly I felt as
if I'd dropped out of the sky.
>> JAY: Right.
>> MOSS: So this wasn't the
classic NDE where you see
lights and you come back
feeling great and all is well.
When I was nine, under emergency
surgery for an appendectomy
in a Melbourne hospital,
I checked out of my body.
I didn't want to stay around.
I had all of those familiar
scenes of seeing the operating
theater, not wanting to be
there, seeing my parents,
not wanting to watch
their grieving.
I wanted to have some fun.
So I go out the window.
I fly around.
I go down to Luna Park, a
theme park on the beach,
just for fun.
I wanted to go on the rides.
I'm going to get
on the Ghost Train.
I go through the moon face,
the moon gate of Luna Park,
and something pulls
me into what seems
to be a world inside the world.
And I live a whole
life there, it seems.
>> JAY: Yeah.
>> MOSS: Grow up, become
a man, grandfather, elder.
And when I come out of that,
when that life is done,
I'm back in the body of
the nine-year-old boy,
and I don't want to be
there again because I've
been in this beautiful scene.
So once again, it's a
sort of unresolved thing.
It's a great adventure.
I remember it.
Who do I talk to about this?
So I'm in a conservative era in
Australia in a military family.
The doctors are
saying hallucinations
due to medication.
It was an Aboriginal boy
who talked to me very matter
of factly about
this kind of thing,
saying, for example,
oh, yeah, we do that.
We get sick.
We go and live with the spirits.
And sometimes we come
back, sometimes we don't.
I talked about
dreaming of the dead.
Yeah, we do that.
And dream of the fu--
yeah, we do that.
We make life or
death decisions based
on that kind of thing, mate.
So my Aboriginal
friend was actually
the first person who
could validate and confirm
these things.
And as I go around
the world today,
I'm very sensitive that the
primary need of so many people
in relation to dreams, other
than getting their dreams back
when the dreams are
lost, is to have
confirmation and validation.
This is real.
It's important.
They are not alone.
And there are ways
of working with this
and using it to support
life and healing.
>> JAY: Well-- one
time in my life,
I was having a conversation
with a very, very wealthy man.
He had about $3 billion,
one of the wealthiest
people in the world.
And he decided that he was going
to give me some good advice,
I guess.
I don't know why
he said this to me.
But he said to me, you're
in a dream right now.
He said, right now us
talking is a dream.
And the difference
between me and you
is that I know I'm dreaming,
and since I know I'm dreaming,
I can create any
world I want here.
And that's how I
got all my money.
And he said, and
this is all testable.
You can go test this.
Go do it.
And I never saw him again.
It was the last conversation
I had with the guy.
But I was a young
man, and I decided
to start testing the theory.
And so I started out small.
OK, well, I want this.
I'm going to create
this kind of reality.
And it started happening.
And I realized that you could
get caught up in this thing
and want to be rich or have all
the sex you want or whatever,
and that's probably
not a good thing.
But I never went that way.
I just went in small
increments of tiny things,
like I wanted to
be a good artist
or I wanted to be a good writer.
So I've actually come to believe
that this is a dream also,
this reality.
>> MOSS: Yes.
>> JAY: What do you
think about that?
>> MOSS: I think that's
absolutely correct.
And I think we can be engaged in
reality creation all the time.
I don't mind what
your game is, as long
as it doesn't hurt other people.
If you want billions
of dollars, go ahead.
Make them.
Don't hurt other people, please.
Don't lay people out of work
and outsource everything
and become Bain
Capital or something.
But I have no problem
with you making money,
if that's your game.
It's not my game.
I'm not hostile to
money, but I don't
do what I do for the money or
the fame or anything like that.
I do what I do for the
pleasure of creating.
I'm a writer and
artist and poet.
And I do it for the joy of
seeing the light of spirit
come back in people's
eyes when they wake up
and start remembering
their bigger story.
That is one of the
great pleasures.
So dreaming is very
important in terms
of learning to become a
creator of your own reality,
other than New Age
nostrums and affirmations.
Because in the dream worlds
change is much faster
than it is in the
physical world.
You enter astral planes, which
consistent of subtle matter.
There's subtle matter.
Temples, palaces, cities
exist in the imaginal realm,
created by human imagination.
And it's meeting up with
larger intelligence and forces.
So if you operate
in those realms
and learn to do it
consciously, you
can see things
produced in a flash.
We spent a weekend at
a mountain gathering
I lead creating an imaginal
city block by block,
feature by feature.
We had great fun.
And then we travelled there
together after that gathering
to places, locations
in this imaginal city.
Which Suhrawardi,
with the great insight
of that medieval Sufi
philosopher, Suhrawardi says,
you know, are absolutely real.
There are temples and palaces
in the Alam al-Mithal,
the realm of images.
You can go there.
You can meet guides there.
You can meet other people.
You can rendezvous there.
So as you become a conscious
or active dreamer--
and you understand we're talking
about much more than analyzing
sleep dreams.
We're talking about
adventures in consciousness
in the multi-dimensional
universe
and claiming your
place at the center
of the multi-dimensional
universe,
living in what Aborigines call
the all-at-once instead of just
in linear time under the
rules of our consensual
hallucinations.
You learn to do
this, and then you'll
be better at playing
the game of creating
your life in the physical world.
You'll have had more
practice, and you'll
have seen results very quickly.
Whereas in the physical
world, it takes a bit longer
to bring things through.
Three times last
week, for example,
I dreamed wonderful
dreams in which
I have the completed
typescript of a book.
In one of these, it
was a whole epic poem,
like Homer or like Apollonius
Rhodius with the "Argonautica."
It's all done and finished.
Well, I might or might not
decide to write a whole epic
poem, but it will take
longer than simply having
it available to me in
the imaginal realm.
But the fact that it's there
gives me hope and heart
that I could bring
through something
like that from that realm.
That's another aspect
to reality creation.
We might be bringing
through from the realm
of true imagination the things
we can manifest, including
physical health,
emotional health,
mental health in this world.
>> JAY: So basically we are
multi-dimensional creatures.
>> MOSS: Yes.
>> JAY: And dreams release
us from the three-dimensional
realities into higher realms.
>> MOSS: Yeah.
For everyday purposes,
dreams-- and I'm
now talking about
sleep dreams primarily,
including the ones we
don't want and certainly
didn't ask for-- they are
our common inheritance.
They are something that is
available to every human being.
Whether we remember
or not, it's there.
I will extend that description
to those experiences
between sleep and awake.
As Tinkerbell said to
Peter Pan, look for me
in the place between sleep and
awake, the hypnogogic zone,
the liminal zone,
the borderland.
That is a fantastic--
>> JAY: It really is.
>> MOSS: --sandlot for lucid
dreaming, conscious dreaming,
adventures in imagination.
So we have direct
access to the sacred.
We have direct access to
the other orders of reality.
We have a way of understanding
parallel universes
and the behavior of
our parallel self
right now in the
universe next to us,
where you and I are now sitting
here having this conversation,
and more interesting
parallel selves
from whom we can bring
gifts and skills and lessons
into our present life.
We can do that.
Physicists speculate about many
worlds, parallel universes.
Dreamers can go
there consciously.
We are time travellers
in dreams too.
We can go to the
past or the future.
As a matter of fact, dreaming
is an absolute survival tool.
I ask of any dream, where
did I go last night?
And if it seems to be the
future, which it often
is-- dreams are often
memories of the future--
do I like that future or not?
If I don't like it, can I
do something to change it?
If I do like it, what action
will I take to manifest
that event I would
like to see come about?
So this is available
to everybody.
>> JAY: Yeah, it is.
And you remind me of a story I
heard Ray Bradbury tell once.
They asked him what his
writing habits were.
And he said, as soon as
I'm in the hypnogogic state
in the morning, I roll out
of bed and start writing.
And so he writes for the
first hour of the day,
and that was it, completely
no coffee, nothing.
He made sure he
stayed as much as he
could in the hypnogogic
place as long as he could.
And that's how he said he
produced his best stories.
>> MOSS: That's beautiful.
I did that yesterday morning
before flying to Boulder.
I was on a 6:00 AM flight.
I got up a 3 o'clock.
I didn't have
coffee or anything.
I just sat down.
I wrote 3,000 words before I
left for the airport at 5:30
without thinking about it.
And that's more than my
average daily production.
I can go many days
without writing
anything of that kind at all.
But Ray Bradbury was
absolutely right.
>> JAY: Yeah.
And also I like this
idea of seeing futures,
parallel futures, possible
futures and then actually
reentering back into that and
reconstructing your own future.
Is that possible?
>> MOSS: Shall I give you an
example of exactly how it is
possible and how exactly
to work with these things?
>> JAY: Please.
>> MOSS: We develop our own
styles of dreaming and our own
markers for what's
going in dreams.
Practice, practice, practice.
As with anything else,
this is a practice.
Like yoga, astronomy,
or anything else,
you get really good at
it by doing a lot of it.
So here's a dream
of my own which
saved my life involving
a possible future.
In the dream, I'm
driving east on a road
I know in upstate New York.
I come to a fork in the road.
There's the convenience
store across the way.
And everything comes to a stop.
The sky becomes very
strange, very beautiful.
It's like there's a purple
bruise in a yellow sky.
And then I'm in black and
white, and then I'm in color.
But it's surreal.
Then it's black and white.
And I understand
before I come out
of the dream I'm
in bardo states.
I'm in afterlife states.
This is for real.
If I don't want to
die on this road--
this is my own understanding
of my own style of dreaming--
I better remember exactly
where the action stopped,
identify the place,
that fork in that road.
Two weeks later, I'm driving
up that hill towards that fork.
There's a UPS truck
parked on a double yellow
to my right blocking the
view of the road ahead.
Normally, I'd pull
out, like any motorist.
Because it's where the action
stopped in the dream, I stop.
I missed the head-on
collision of the 18-wheeler
coming down the hill
at 60 miles a hour
in a 30 mile per hour
zone because I remembered
that was where the
action stopped.
And I was catapulted
unwillingly and unprepared
into an afterlife I didn't want.
I believe that
dream saved my life.
So it's like this, I think, Jay.
Any future we see is
a possible future.
The odds on it
manifesting can be
changed if we have
some flexibility.
And even if we cannot change
the future because it's a mass
event or we have no
means of changing it
or because our body's about to
give up or someone else's is,
the dream prepares us for those
events so we can work around
it.
Even if we can't change
the event itself,
we can change our attitude.
We can be prepared
for that event.
We can avoid that date
with a mass disaster,
that kind of thing.
This is, by the way,
one of the reasons why
all human societies that I know
about, up until modern era,
have valued dreams
and dreamers highly.
They've understood that we
see the future in dreams,
not only for ourselves
and our families
but for communities
and the whole world.
It's part of our
human survival kit.
And we've got all these analysts
and all this technology.
But my goodness,
we're missing out
on one of the most
valuable resources
for scouting the future.
>> JAY: Absolutely.
>> MOSS: You can save your
life and save your health.
>> JAY: Absolutely.
And in fact, like
you said before, it's
why we're here, because our
ancestors dreamed and saved
their lives.
>> MOSS: Exactly.
>> JAY: I was on British
radio, unfortunately,
about two months ago with
a bunch of scientists.
They were trying to
debunk me, I guess.
And I had to resort
finally to the fact
that Francis Crick
discovered the shape of DNA
through a dream.
>> MOSS: Yes.
>> MOSS: And Einstein also said
that his theory of revelation
came from a dream of seeing
a street light and the mist
around the street light and
seeing the light reflecting
from the streetlight and
realizing that light travelled
and that he began constructing
the theory of relativity,
which began with a dream.
>> MOSS: Francis
Crick, of course,
became a skeptic about
many aspects of this,
but you're quite right about
the dream discovery of DNA.
Another of my books, "The
Secret History of Dreaming,"
has really a major
chapter on dreaming
in the history of science and
how scientific breakthroughs
have come through from
dreams, but more particularly
from that hypnogogic state,
that in between state
when creativity
is running strong.
Kekule discovering the
nature of the benzene
ring when he's dozing by a
fire, dormant between sleep
and awake, and sees a
serpent biting its tail
and suddenly understands.
There are so many examples like
this in the history of science.
So when scientists are
skeptical about this,
they're forgetting the history
of the greatest breakthroughs
in their own field.
But, you know, the people
the British call the talking
classes-- academia, scientists,
and the mainstream media--
are the most hard-headed
people when it comes to--
>> JAY: They certainly are.
>> MOSS: --all of this.
Ordinary people get it.
I find whatever
their job, whatever--
ordinary people get
this very quickly.
And they're hungry for it, Jay.
You know that.
>> JAY: You're absolutely right.
>> MOSS: They want
guidance and confirmation,
and they want tools that they
can use on a daily basis.
You learn this, you learn
this active dreaming,
you can be a shaman
of the breakfast table
wherever you are.
Wherever you are,
your day starts
with some real work of healing.
>> JAY: Yeah.
And the problem with
academia is I can almost
tell what kind of
degree someone has
within seconds of talking to
them, because there's this,
I don't know, a certain
arrogance about them.
They understand reality,
and the rest of us don't.
>> MOSS: Well, one of the things
that Ken Wilber in particular
schooled me to understand when
I read one of his early books
"Eye to Eye" is that real
science is state-specific.
If you want to
understand a field,
you must have the
means of knowing
appropriate to that field.
For this field, there's no way
of understanding this field
unless you can enter and
travel in the dream space,
in other words a
non-ordinary reality,
in other words in
the astral realms.
Unless you go there, unless you
learn techniques like shared
dreaming, mutual dreaming,
dreaming with other people,
you don't know.
You don't have a science.
You have a science of
the brain, perhaps,
but the brain can never explain
the mind because the brain is
inside the mind, not
the other way around.
So although it's great
to have all this stuff
that neuroscience is giving
us, and we can use it,
and we can use it for
healing our bodies,
it will no more help you to
understand the larger reality
than pulling apart a TV monitor
in hopes of understanding
where the signal is coming from.
You won't find it
in the TV monitor.
You won't find it in the brain.
We want to know these
things about the brain.
It's great to know just
how wonderful the brain is.
But we'll never find
what we're looking
for in terms of the origins
and nature of consciousness
or the nature of the
multi-dimensional universe
or the nature of dreaming by
just picking apart the brain
and looking at chemical flushing
and random neural firing
during the night.
We'll never get it that way.
>> JAY: Yeah.
The brain is really more
like an antenna for a flow
or the Tao of reality.
>> MOSS: Yeah.
And if the antenna
isn't working very well,
then, of course, our images
will be jumbled and vague.
So that's important to know
in relation to dreaming.
There are trash dreams.
Not all dreams are important.
In Hawaii, which has a rich
vocabulary of dreaming--
>> JAY: Yes, it does.
>> MOSS: --they have a word
for trash dreams which I love,
wild goatfish dreams.
They eat goatfish.
You eat wild goatfish
in the wrong season,
and it produces a
dream that's really
the result of what you
put into your belly.
So you throw that out.
That's a trash dream.
On the other hand, you could
have a straight-up dream.
And that's not about
a shot of alcohol.
A straight-up dream
is something that
doesn't require interpretation
because it's absolutely clear,
often showing the future
or something at a distance.
Dreaming peoples have
a vocabulary like that.
My Scottish ancestors had a word
for a certain kind of dreamer.
The word sounds like
something you cook up
in a sheep's stomach.
Bruadaraiche is the
closest I can come.
It actually mean
something like someone
who dreams the past
and the future,
someone who is a time
traveller in dreams.
And you know when you start
picking these words apart
that ancient and indigenous
cultures understand right
inside the language what the
nature in many modalities
of dreaming is in a way that our
modern vocabulary and certainly
the language of
Western psychology
doesn't equip us to understand
or describe at all well.
>> JAY: What do you think about
movies and television shows?
Are these affecting or
atrophying our dream state?
Are they helping it?
Because they're like dreams.
Movies are like dreams.
And it's almost like
a reconstructed dream,
a good movie especially.
And I'm wondering
if that is having
maybe a deleterious
effect on us.
>> MOSS: I don't know to what
extent movies are having that
effect.
I think some people
program what they're
going to do during the night
based upon what they watch
on TV, although TV, as Marshall
McLuhan said with prescience,
is a cool medium, not
in the sense of great.
It's a cool medium because
it doesn't mobilize people,
unlike radio, which is a
hot medium in his parlance.
So I don't know that TV
really pushes people,
pushes their buttons
all that much
either way in
relation to dreaming.
The depiction of
dreaming in movies
and TV is sometimes
interesting and sometimes not.
"Medium" the TV
show, for example,
has a lot of psychic activity
based on dreams, some of which
is quite plausible
and well done.
I can think of movies in which--
I can think of the Bruce Willis
movie where somebody's
trying to get
in touch with his departed
wife and a dead boy
says to him find
her in your dreams.
>> JAY: Yeah.
>> MOSS: So there have
been moments like that.
I think that virtual reality
games, internet games,
this kind of thing are
probably taking us deeper
into an artificial
version of the dreaming.
And there are opportunities
and great risks in that.
They have a word in Urdu-- I
get around-- which is tilism.
Tilism is an artificial
reality, maybe a whole universe.
It's related to
the word talisman.
A tilism is a realm
of enchantment
where you get imprisoned
and you can't get out.
Think of "The Matrix."
You're in a realm that
is an artificial realm.
It is possible that we
are setting ourselves up
for more and more of this,
particularly our young people,
to have their heads inside
an artificial reality,
unlike the real
world of dreaming.
And this could go in all
sorts of unwanted directions.
So I'm a bit
concerned about that.
I'm a bit concerned about how
our technology could equip us
to have 100 orgasms
in a virtual reality
all the time, losing
us to anything of value
in the real world either in this
universe or in other universes.
>> JAY: I worry about
that, too, actually.
What about drugs?
>> MOSS: What about drugs?
>> JAY: Behavior
modification drugs,
SSRIs that they're giving
out all over the place now.
Does that affect
your dream states?
>> MOSS: Yes.
I think we're a
pill-pushing society.
We're a doped up culture.
People take dope for
everything for pain,
for alteration for
functioning, et cetera.
A lot of these
medications interfere
with spontaneous dreaming.
And I wouldn't counsel
anybody to go off their meds
because they notice it's
affecting the dreaming.
They might need the
meds for other reasons.
I'm not equipped
to advise on that.
But I think that a lot of the
meds that are being handed out,
particularly antidepressants and
sleeping pills-- some sleeping
pills actually
advertise, there's
one that used to advertise the
idea that you wouldn't have
any dreams if you took this
sleeping pill, no more dreams.
>> JAY: Oh, what a drag.
>> MOSS: Oh, my goodness.
Talk about missing
the movies cosmically.
>> JAY: Yep.
>> MOSS: And I will be
approached by people
who've suffered serious
depression or bipolar disorder
or what is diagnosed
as sleep disorders.
They say, can I go off my meds?
I say, I can't discuss it.
Go and talk to your doctor.
>> JAY: Yeah.
Right.
>> MOSS: But it does interfere.
I'd noticed this as
a historian as well.
My first job was a
lecturer in ancient history
in my native Australia.
When I survey the history
of sleep and dreams
cross-culturally from as
far back as we can trace,
most people never
expected to sleep
the way we expect
ourselves to sleep today.
They did not expect
to lie down and sleep
like the dead for six,
seven, eight hours.
>> JAY: That's right.
>> MOSS: They expected to have
at least two distinct phases
of sleep with time in between.
They were biphasic or
polyphasic sleepers.
It's only in the last 150 years
in the west, post-Industrial
Revolution, we've got into
this habit of thinking,
OK, you lie down, you go to
sleep, you get up, that's that.
What happens in between
is not important.
In cultures which have the
different mode of sleep,
the relationship with dreams
is likely to be different.
Because if you have that
interregnum, that interval,
it's a chance to pull things up.
It's a chance to spend time
in that hypnogogic border
state of consciousness.
It's a chance to share
things with someone
who is sharing your bed
or sharing your community
or your big house in
an indigenous culture.
So I think that our whole
relationship with sleep
is, in terms of human
evolution, strange
and possibly undesirable.
I'm a biphasic or
polyphasic sleeper.
>> JAY: Well, tell
us what that means.
>> MOSS: Biphasic means that you
sleep in two distinct periods
of sleep, like say three
hours or four hours a night,
if you need them, then
maybe a two-hour nap.
That would be an example
in modern culture.
>> JAY: Oh, really?
>> MOSS: And that's the way
I like to live when I can.
When I'm traveling, I tend
not to be a biphasic sleeper,
because I don't have
time to get the nap.
So I typically sleep for
no more than three hours
or so at a time.
I'm usually refreshed
because I have
such interesting experiences
through the nights.
Polyphasic would mean that
you need more than two bursts
of sleep or downtime in
the course of the day.
And hey, as technology
makes it possible
for us to work away
from the office,
why shouldn't we
live more like that?
And I think of Thomas Edison.
Now we don't know very
much about his dreams,
except that he realized
a huge life dream.
But we know that Thomas
Edison advised all his people
if they wanted to be creative
to disregard the clock.
If you want breakfast at
midnight or if you want
champagne at breakfast, have it.
If you want to
sleep at 3 o'clock
in the afternoon or 10
o'clock in the morning,
do it, as long as you produce.
>> JAY: Yeah.
Because he'd sleep
under his desk.
>> MOSS: Yeah, he'd
sleep under his desk.
He'd sleep in the workplace.
He'd be available at any time.
The day would sometimes
start at midnight.
I like that.
>> JAY: I like that too.
>> MOSS: I like
that mode of living.
>> JAY: I do too.
>> MOSS: And he was probably
in a somewhat hypnogogic state
much of the time.
>> JAY: I was just
going to say--
>> MOSS: So he may not be a guy
who reported a lot of dreams,
but he's in that liminal
state much of the time,
as creative people often are.
>> JAY: Yeah.
And I've noticed when I do
cat naps in the afternoon
that the hypnogogic state is
increased for some reason.
>> MOSS: Yeah.
>> JAY: It's like
a two-hour nap,
I'll wake in an ultra hypnogogic
state that I don't usually wake
up to in the morning.
>> MOSS: And then the other
thing is healing's about
wholeness, right?
It's about getting in
touch with everything,
being more of ourselves,
restoring our lost relationship
with nature and the animals
and the birds and the winds
and the mountain and the forest.
That involves being
a wakeful dreamer
as you go around
in everyday life.
It involves being alert to
the play of synchronicity
or coincidence at every
turning, noticing mythic themes,
developing what Baudelaire
with a poet's clarity
called a state of poetic
health, which means you
notice rhymes and resemblances.
And today, for example,
I arrive in Boulder.
I have a day of really mythic,
wonderful synchronicity.
I arrive at the
Boulder bookstore
to talk about my new
poetry collection.
I'm greeted at the desk by a
woman whose name is Athena.
So I say, quick as a
whip, where's Odysseus?
And they say, we have
Odysseus in the store.
We'll call him.
And they call a young man who
works for the book shop called
Odysseus, no kidding.
I say, where'd
you get that name?
Oh, my parents lived in Greece.
It's my name.
So I have myself
photographed with Odysseus.
I then walk into
Gaiam this morning.
I am greeted by a
woman who gives me
a cup of espresso
whose name is Gaia
and shows me the tattoo
of Gaia on her upper arm.
I walk into the
studio, and I have
a guy whose middle
name is Icarus.
So you know this is
not just coincidence.
In a word that I invented,
it's reincidence, incidents
of cases of meaningful
coincidence coming up again
and again and again.
Why is that so relevant to me?
Because I love the Greek myths.
I've been immersed in
them again recently.
I've been dreaming of them.
I've been back in the world
of Odysseus and the Argonauts
and all of that.
And I come to Boulder,
and I'm surrounded
by characters whose
names are right
out of the central casting
for the Greek epic myths.
>> JAY: Well, that's
a very Boulder story.
So I'm really interested
in synchronicity.
It's one of my
favorite subjects.
>> MOSS: Yes
>> JAY: And I have an
astonishing catalog
of coincidences and
synchronicities in my life,
of which I wouldn't even be here
if it wasn't for me following
those synchronicities and
realizing that something
important just happened, a
tear in the matrix or whatever.
>> MOSS: Yes.
>> JAY: So what
is synchronicity?
>> MOSS: Well, synchronicity
is a word invented by Mr. Jung,
who was a classical scholar
as well as everything else--
>> JAY: And a dream--
>> MOSS: A guy who was guided by
dreams and synchronicity every
day of his life, as I am.
I live like Jung
in that respect.
I don't do anything important
without being guided by dreams
or synchronicity,
those steer me in ways
that I might have
expected, and I
follow those prompts,
just as Jung did.
So synchronicity literally
means things coming together
at a given moment in time.
So it's not really
a satisfactory term,
because it implies these things
are happening at the same time.
Wolfgang Pauli, the
quantum physicist
who dialogued with
Jung about all of this
as Jung was developing
synchronicity theory,
said, this word won't do at all.
Call it isomorphy.
Isomorphy means identity
or similarity of forms.
That's a better term.
>> JAY: It is.
>> MOSS: I've just invented
recently the term reincidence
for things that
repeat over time.
What is it in general,
synchronicity or meaningful
coincidence?
It's when your inner
sense of meaning
meets an external
event that matches
your inner sense
of meaning, and you
feel that the universe
has spoken to you.
>> JAY: That is a
great description.
>> MOSS: There's something
very personal about it.
People struggle to explain it.
They get tongue-tied
or tongue-twisted.
But it feels personal.
It's when the universe
gets personal,
you feel you're being patted
on the shoulder or something's
mussing your hair or
something is pushing you back.
It could be negative
runs as well.
>> JAY: It can be.
>> MOSS: Absolutely.
But you know that the powers of
the deeper world are at play.
Dreams in relation
to coincidence,
I think it's like this.
When we go dreaming in the
big dreams, we go traveling.
We travel through
the curtain walls
of our ordinary understanding,
our ordinary reality.
We get out there.
We might do it the shaman's way.
We might do it the night.
We might do it by
some other technique.
Through coincidence, the
powers behind the curtain walls
come through to play with
us and manifest in our lives
and show us something
of the deeper state.
I think that's how it is.
So working with
dreams and coincidence
are the two halves of a
life plan, certainly for me.
But you know what?
Anybody can learn to do this.
And for many people
who are still
struggling to remember
dreams, playing a game
like the first vanity
plate of the day
is going to give you a
message or the first bird you
see is going to suggest
something or the book you open
will show you something in
the passage you open to,
that works for them.
They can do that right away.
And they're often
stunned by how quickly
the messages start multiplying.
>> JAY: Yeah.
A few weeks ago, I was reading
a book before I went to bed.
It was on Egypt, and I
was reading about Horus.
And I have an ash tree right
outside my bedroom window.
And I woke up in the
morning, usual time,
and I opened up the curtain.
There's a huge hawk
sitting on the branch.
And Horus is a hawk.
So I wake my wife
up, all excited
that Horus is
outside the window.
And it was a synchronicity.
>> MOSS: Yes.
>> JAY: I have no idea what it
meant, but it was beautiful.
>> MOSS: It is beautiful.
And it's about more than
getting individual messages.
This is a very
important thing to note.
It's about pattern recognition.
It's about developing a
consciousness of the field.
It's about noting,
as the Chinese say,
that there are things that
like to happen together.
It's reading patterns.
It's not just getting a sign.
See, a sign is less
interesting than the symbol.
A sign is like an
arrow that says
go left or go right or stop.
There are synchronicities
that are like signs,
stop, go, go left, go right.
A symbol is what brings together
something that we know or think
we know with something we
do not yet know and takes us
into a deeper reality.
>> JAY: It's a congealing thing.
>> MOSS: Yes.
So Baudelaire, again,
says with poetic clarity,
you are walking in a forest
of living symbols that
are looking at you,
"Correspondence," the poem.
>> JAY: Nice.
>> MOSS: That's how
I live every day.
There's a chapter which borrows
from that title in the book
I'm writing at the moment
about living by synchronicity.
The hawk, let me tell
you a quick hawk story.
This is part of the
watershed in my life.
I mentioned that I moved to
upstate New York to a farm
with 60 acres of
woodland that never
heard the sound of an ax--
>> JAY: How nice.
>> MOSS: --because of a hawk.
So I'm thinking, OK,
I want to live here.
I had some money at the time.
I'd like to buy this place.
I'm sitting under a white oak.
I'm thinking, if it's
right, there'll be a sign.
I know no one in this
part of the world.
A red-tailed hawk
circles lower and lower,
squalling at me in
a language I feel
I ought to be able to
understand, and drops a feather
between my legs.
So that was a clincher,
the unsecret wing
brush from the universe.
When it was time
to leave that farm
and come back into community
and teach the things I was now
teaching, I go back into
the house for the third time
after we've closed it up.
It's broom clean.
There's no reason to
go back in the house,
but I have to go back.
And I hear a rustling
from the big family
room we'd added at the back.
And I go to the fireplace,
and behind the fire screen
there was a fledgling red-tailed
hawk, a very young one
that'd somehow come
down the chimney.
So my last action on the land
I bought because of the hawk
is to carry the young
hawk out next to my heart.
And I release it, and it flies
straight into the branches
of the white oak tree where the
first hawk gave me the sign.
You know, Jay, you
live long enough,
you notice these loops,
these recurrences,
these eternal returns.
>> JAY: Yes.
That's a great story.
I love that stuff.
So synchronicity is,
in a way-- I once
had a very wise man that
I knew, and I went to him
and I said, how come
there's no masters anymore
that I can go study,
highly educated
ascended, even, masters?
And he laughed at me.
He was much older than me.
And he said, well, they're gone.
They're kind of gone.
And I said, well, what can I do?
And he said, in this
world synchronicity
becomes the teacher.
And I knew what synchronicity
and coincidence was,
but I didn't understand
what he meant.
But I realized that
I was not awake
to the synchronicities
that were occurring to me.
So I made a conscious effort
to become awake to them.
And I see synchronicities
and coincidences
happening to other people.
And I see they're
asleep to them.
And I'm wondering what
we can do to wake people
up to start noticing that the
universe is trying to tell you
something when you
have a synchronicity.
>> MOSS: Well, I don't
regard myself as a preacher.
I'm passionate about what I do.
I don't know that
it's necessary for me
to go around saying to
people, wake up, wake up.
Although that's what the angel
always says in the scriptures.
The angel turns up.
It's usually not cute.
The first words from the angelic
being are things like wake
up, get up, get off your
bed, get on with it, wake up,
wake up.
In Egypt the word for
dream means awakening.
We transliterate it as rswt.
It means an awakening.
So I'm very interested
in waking people up,
but I don't feel I have to
go around and shout at them.
I feel that my role,
other than to teach
the thousands of people I
teach through my workshops
and the many thousands more
I teach through my books,
is to confirm and
consolidate people's growing
understanding when
they begin to wake up.
You see, that's what we need.
You begin to wake up.
You need someone to confirm
and validate what's going on.
When I moved to my
previous home in Troy,
New York-- there's that
classic reference again--
I dreamed of a dead psychic
I never met who said,
Troy will be very
important in your life.
And I woke up thinking, oh, yes,
of course Troy is important,
Troy, "The Iliad,"
Achilles, the gods, yes.
I lived in Troy, New
York after that dream.
I'd just arrived
and putting books
on the bookcase in my study.
And suddenly a huge man,
even by my standards,
is at the door,
banging on the door.
And I open the door,
somewhat startled.
I'm your neighbor.
I've just come
from the graveyard.
I smelled beer on his breath.
He's an Irish American.
He's got beer on his breath
at 8:00 in the morning.
OK, fine.
Just come from the
graveyard, Jimmy?
Yeah.
My dad came by last night.
Had to go make sure he's
still in the ground, he said.
His dad had visited
him, but he had
no model of understanding
that interaction
with the dead, the
deceased is possible
because they're still alive.
So my first job that morning
was to calm him down and explain
to him exactly why
his dad might have
come visiting, why
it's a real experience,
whether it's a dream or
hypnogogic or a vision
or a visitation, and
how to work with it.
I got him calmed down.
I got him to follow
a simple ritual, when
he was calm enough, to initiate
a conversation with his father
and start bringing through
all the forgiveness
and healing that
is available there.
That's one of the huge
areas of healing, healing
with our ancestors,
healing with our departed,
healing with our deceased.
And dreaming is absolutely
central to that vast field
of healing.
>> JAY: So we can heal
relationships with people who
have passed away
through our dreams.
>> MOSS: Yes, absolutely.
>> JAY: How does that work?
>> MOSS: Well, our departed are
trying to get in touch with us.
>> JAY: They definitely are.
>> MOSS: Far most of the
deceased are trying to reach us
than the other way around.
Although there are plenty of
people in this reality who'd
like to talk to their deceased.
And I facilitate that and offer
simple methods for doing it.
For example, I had a fireman
in once of my early workshops.
His wife died
three years before.
He's a one-woman guy,
salt of the earth guy,
Irish-American, Tom, guy.
And he's been all
over the place looking
for people who could
facilitate direct contact.
He hasn't dreamed of her.
He doesn't trust the psychics
who are giving messages.
He wants direct
contact with his wife.
So I say, OK, we're
going to do a journey.
I'm going to tap the drum.
You're going to imagine a place,
remember a place where you've
been together and
start out there.
Well, actually he finds himself
traveling to another place
from the place he remembered.
He finds her very busy
in another reality.
She doesn't look
up to begin with.
He says, don't you love me?
Oh, sure I love you, Tom.
But I've got things
to do here, and you've
got a lot of life ahead of you.
Go ahead and enjoy it.
And he's got mixed feelings,
comes back, tears, joy.
Six months later I see
him in the produce section
of the supermarket.
He's lost 30 pounds.
He looks really good, tanned.
What happened to you?
Oh, after my wife
gave me permission,
I dated that girl-- 67 years
old girl-- from the church,
and we just are back
from our honeymoon.
So that was a case of
facilitating a journey
to meet the departed.
But the deceased are looking
for us in our dreams.
If we could only wake up to
what's going on in the night,
we have the simplest
form of communication.
There are all sorts of
conscious wide-awake techniques
you can use to
establish and maintain
this kind of communication.
But I would suggest that the
most common, most serviceable,
most practical way to get
together with your deceased
for healing and
mutual understanding
is to pay more
attention to dreams
in which they may be showing up.
They may be visiting you.
They may still be around.
Or you may be traveling
into their realms.
We do it all the time.
>> JAY: Wow.
That's great.
So I'll approach
another subject here,
one that I think is important to
what you're trying to tell us.
One of my old
friends, a guy I think
you know or are familiar
with, was Terence McKenna.
And he was a neoshaman,
I guess you could say.
And he advocated taking
tremendous amounts
of psychedelic plants.
>> MOSS: Uh-huh.
>> JAY: And I want to know
what you think about that.
>> MOSS: I have no interest.
I don't judge those
who take them.
I've never used them.
I've never needed them.
But then I have a story
which is although not unique,
perhaps exceptional,
in my childhood
in the kind of dying and coming
back that I did and in the fact
that the dream world has
always been my default reality.
My sense of identity
and continuity
has never been based on this
body or even on this identity.
I've been like that
since my boyhood.
>> JAY: Because of your
earlier death experiences.
>> MOSS: Well, yes.
Or you can put it
the other way round.
Maybe the death experiences
were related to that
rather than the death
experiences triggering it,
but certainly since childhood.
The gift of experiences like
that is often the person who's
been through them is
very at home in worlds
beyond the physical.
And I've always
been at home there.
I've had to struggle to find
my way in the physical world.
So I've never had any use for
consciousness-altering drugs.
I drink alcohol, but that's
to slow me down and narrow
the gates of perception rather
than to open them wider.
I don't judge people who use
psychedelics, because the dream
ability is so
atrophied, particularly
in certainly Western men.
>> JAY: Mm hmm.
>> MOSS: Many
people may need it.
But I have no interest
in going, for example,
to take a drug whose
native name means
"that which makes me puke"
in order to meet an anaconda
spirit or the spirit
of a dead headhunter.
That has no interest to me.
And I would counsel
those who do it
to be very careful about
what group they're with
and what happens afterwards.
Dreaming doesn't
require chemicals.
And the most
powerful true shamans
don't need psychedelics.
They do it by flicking a
switch inside themselves.
I'm not calling myself one
of the most powerful shamans,
but I do everything I do in
consciousness, other than when
I'm drumming in a workshop,
by flicking that inner switch.
I don't use anything else.
>> JAY: And there's direct
relationships between dreams,
brain chemistries,
and these compounds.
So there might be a lot
of truth to the fact
that maybe the
dreaming in the West
is that the ability to dream
is atrophying, especially
among people like Terence who
were trying to be scientists
and very, very left
brain kind of people.
And maybe they had to just do
it because there was no escape.
>> MOSS: Well, maybe it's
impeding the functioning
of the brain to
receive, to act--
serve as a transceiver for
experiences within the greater
realm of mind.
If we accept that the
brain is inside the mind,
that the interesting
dreams are not simply
a product of brain functioning
but maybe experiences
within the world of mind or
the larger reality, what we're
really talking
about is the ability
of your brain to function
as an accurate and helpful
transceiver.
If your brain isn't
working as something
which can receive
these messages,
maybe psychedelics
will alter the brain
in a way which makes
you more receptive,
but they might also
generate brain-centered,
chemically-produced
phenomena which
are not the authentic reality
that real shamans, mystics,
and others want to get to.
They don't typically use, not
the most powerful ones-- they
don't typically use
any of this stuff.
>> JAY: No.
In fact, all of the dream
cultures of the past
were completely clean
of all that stuff.
>> MOSS: Well, my
personal dream college--
I founded my own dream
school, you know.
I train teachers
of active dreaming,
and they're operating
all over the world
now, from Romania to Brazil.
>> JAY: Good.
>> MOSS: But with no
organization, no hierarchy,
no foundation money,
just as dreamers doing
their spontaneous
thing, fresh thing.
We're a drug-free
dreaming culture.
We do our thing, and
we've got so good
that we can take
50 people and have
them travel together
somewhere very interesting,
maybe to a different
cultural or a different time
and bring back
group logs, produce
group logs recording
the whole experience.
This is the real science
of dream experience.
There was one PhD
researcher, William Dement--
don't play with the name.
He was not demented.
William Dement was
a really good guy--
who said that the real
science of dreaming
must take place inside the
dream state, not around it.
That is where the real
science of dreaming
will be developed, through
experiences inside the dream
state.
That is correct.
>> JAY: And you become better
and better at it once you
understand the topography
and the language, right?
>> MOSS: Yes.
Yes.
The topography and the language,
we develop our own geographies.
By the way, all our geographies
of the afterlife and imaginal
realms come from this
kind of experience.
It gets sort of codified.
It gets ossified sometimes.
Whether it's the Egyptian
books of the dead
or "The Tibetan
Book of the Dead"
or the tales of
the Celtic Imrama,
the voyage tales, these all come
from journeys in consciousness,
which can often be
called dreams or visions.
That's where they come from,
then they get codified.
But this stuff is too important
to know about second-hand.
You want direct experience.
So this is a path of
direct experience,
and that's what people want.
They're hungry for it.
>> JAY: Yeah.
One of my good friends who's
living in Australia, Robert
Lawlor, he lived
with the Aborigines
for about four years,
and they trusted him.
He's a very trustworthy guy.
And he wrote, I think,
probably the best book
about the Aborigines,
"Voices of the First Day."
And he told me a story
that he was with the tribe,
and they went to a stone.
It was just a stone,
a rock, a boulder
in Australia in the Outback.
They sat in a circle
around this boulder,
and he asked somebody,
what are we doing?
And they said,
well, this boulder
has a direct relationship
to this star over there.
And he said, OK.
And he didn't quite understand
what they were doing.
And they all went into
a sort of a sleep.
He said they weren't snoring.
They were just
quiet, laying down.
And he just sat there.
He didn't understand
what was going on.
After about four
hours, they were
all up and talking excitedly.
And they had traveled
as a group to the star,
and they were talking about
incidences within the dreams.
Did you see that
purple-faced person?
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, yeah, we talked, and
he showed me a couple things.
And that's when
he, Robert, finally
understood that this was
not a fantasy of any kind.
This was actually a reality that
he could actually test and see.
>> MOSS: Yes.
Well, this is actually
typical of dreaming cultures.
It's a typical exercise.
It's also a typical
training practice
in shamanic dreaming traditions
that you'll take the apprentice
and send him on assignment.
You'll only give him a few
details of where he's going.
Then the elders who've
been there before
will check whether he
got the rest of it right.
>> JAY: That's
exactly what they did.
>> MOSS: So that becomes part
of the training exercise.
You with your Egyptian
interests would probably
be very interested
in the journeys
to the Sirius star system
that I have led personally.
An early version is described
in my book "Dreamgates,"
to play pushy
author for a moment.
>> JAY: Go for it.
I'm really interested in Sirius.
>> MOSS: And you'll be
interested in the language
used, both for Sirius and for
the vehicle for the voyaging
and other details.
The first journey of this
kind that I led-- I've
stopped leading that
particular journey,
but you'll be interested
to see how it was done.
And I was inspired both
by Egyptian traditions
and by the traditions
of the Dogon of Mali--
>> JAY: That's right.
>> MOSS: --who saw Sirius B 50
years before astronomers found
it.
So I know this kind of
practice, and I lead it.
And it's actually, for me,
probably the most interesting
single aspect of what I do,
other than the very everyday
practical functions
of what I do,
which are to give people
power, including the ability
to remember and live
and tell their bigger
and braver story
in everyday life.
I'm a storyteller.
When people ask me on
airplanes "what do you do?"
I'll sometimes say,
well, I'm a storyteller,
and my great pleasure is to
help other people wake up
to their bigger and bolder
story and live it and tell it
so well that they entertain
the spirits, including
their own creative spirit.
So we want to get people in
touch with the bigger story.
And if you do that,
Jay, as you know,
if you're in touch
with your deeper story,
you have courage
and resources to get
through all the
downsides of life.
Healing flows from that.
>> JAY: Yeah.
Once you know your
own story, fear
is the first thing
that's jettisoned,
because you know
where you're going.
>> MOSS: You can
step through it.
>> JAY: Yeah.
>> MOSS: You can step
through the fear more easily.
I'll put it that way.
>> JAY: That's right.
Because you know
where you're headed.
>> MOSS: Yeah.
>> JAY: Yeah.
And then you create
your own reality
through that, the creation
of your own story.
But you're right.
You have to find out
what your story is.
>> MOSS: Yeah.
Courage is fear conquered
by something stronger,
whether that is love or
faith or a bigger story,
the story that will get
you through the clashing
rocks which are supposed
to be impassable.
What is that story
that will take
you, that will be your helmsman?
>> JAY: Yeah.
So tell us more about Sirius.
>> MOSS: Oh, that's
enough for now.
You go get the book.
You try it.
>> MOSS: I'll have to read it.
Now you've got me
intrigued, because I'm
really interested in Sirius.
>> MOSS: Well, you know
perfectly well that
the Egyptians, at least when
they knew what they were doing,
regarded Sirius, the Dog Star,
as the place where you get
in touch with the origin and
purpose of human life on this
planet.
It is a place from which higher
intelligences made a link
with an evolving life
form on this planet.
>> JAY: That's right.
>> MOSS: That's my personal
mythology about these things.
>> JAY: Well, the Egyptians
believed that we came from
Sirius.
>> MOSS: I think they
may not be wrong.
Although there may be
other species among us.
That's enough of that.
I'm drawing the line
on Sirius for now.
>> JAY: Got it.
You got me hooked.
I'll read it.
>> MOSS: Although
yesterday on the plane,
I found myself next to a
brilliantly vital 76-year-old
woman who speaks with the same
Anglo-Australian accent exactly
that I do who is an astronomer.
And the last part
of the conversation
was about what she calls
the Dog Star, Sirius.
>> JAY: Really?
>> MOSS: Yes.
>> JAY: One coincidence
after another here.
>> MOSS: Yes.
>> JAY: All right.
So we have four or
five minutes left.
And I was wondering
what you want
to leave everybody with here.
Because what you're
saying, I think,
is actually some of the
most important things
that we've presented.
>> MOSS: Well, I'll tell a
story from a native culture,
dreaming culture that I was
tempted to tell you when you
asked where are the
masters today, et cetera.
So this is a teaching
story of the Makiritare,
a dreaming people of Venezuela.
It's about their first
shaman, their foofi,
their first shaman.
It's a time of darkness.
People have fallen from
memory of the gods,
the spirits, the dreams.
They don't have
their dreams anymore.
So they're living and
mating with anacondas
and wild pigs, peccaries.
There's nothing wrong with
anacondas or peccaries,
but a human who falls to that
level has lost something,
I think we could agree.
>> JAY: Yeah.
>> MOSS: So in this
dark time, Medatia,
the name of the first
shaman-to-be, starts dreaming.
He dreams so strongly,
he spirals up
through the thatched
roof of his hut.
He spirals up through
a cloud barrier
into a world above
this one where
he meets a being he regards
as a master or a God.
And he falls down to
worship this master or god
until he wakes up to the fact
that this master or god is
his own self on that
higher level of reality.
He only understands this
when his senses are cleansed.
He's bathed in a pool
of electric blue fire.
His senses are changed.
Then he's able to see
that the master is not
some being above him.
It is his self on
a higher level.
This is repeated 10 times.
Now the Makiritare take
days to tell this story.
But we're Westerners
sitting in a studio.
So we'll just say
he goes through this
with all the details
changing 10 times.
And now he's somewhat
different, because he's
absorbed the songs.
The knowledge is
coded in the songs.
>> JAY: Right.
>> MOSS: He's absorbed the songs
of the masters or gods on 10
levels above his ordinary self.
And now he's told he's got to go
back down there, a place where
people live as pigs and snakes.
Does he want to go?
No.
But he has an assignment.
He's made to go back.
And now he's
different, because he's
carrying the songs of the 10
higher levels of the self.
But he's also
carrying compassion.
He can see where people
have a hole in themselves
because part of them is missing.
He can read the colors
of their feelings.
And he starts calling the
dream souls of his people
to him at night.
Come to me, lost soul.
[WHISTLES] I'm
whistling to guide you.
You're walking on moonlight.
And one by one, he
instructs the dream souls
and sends them back to the
bodies of the sleepers so
that in the morning
as they wake,
they remember something from
their dreams and with it
something of human purpose.
And they return from the
wallows of the peccaries
and the anacondas to live a
halfway decent human life.
That's a story about dreaming.
>> JAY: I like that.
>> MOSS: And that's a
story about masters too.
I don't want a master
who's up there.
>> JAY: No.
>> MOSS: I want to be in touch
with the self just a little bit
higher that I can talk to,
have a sit down on a terrace
overlooking the world.
I actually write about
this in some of my books,
my double on the balcony,
one of my poems in "Here
Everything is Dreaming,"
my poetry collection.
It's called "The
Double on the Balcony."
It's about conversations
with that self
on a slightly higher level
who doesn't judge but has
a perspective that I lack
down here in the marketplace
of the world, as
the Yoruba call it.
>> JAY: Mm hmm.
I think that is an amazing
way to end this show.
It's been a great show.
I really appreciate it.
I think everybody
needs to pay attention
to what your higher
self is telling you,
because it really has your
best interest at heart always.
>> MOSS: Yeah.
>> JAY: Thanks, Robert.
>> MOSS: My pleasure.
>> JAY: The rebirth of shamanism
in our modern world is one
of the most hopeful signs ever.
By combining the
ancient with the modern,
Robert Moss has done much to
guide us towards our destiny.
Go to the bookstore and
get his books, Robert Moss.
Thanks, Robert.
I'm Jay Weidner for
"The Healing Matrix,"
right here on Gaiam TV.